q01
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, what sodium-chloride solution strengths are stated for sodium stearate and sodium laurate, and how does sodium caproate behave even in a saturated solution?

q02
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, what cost-saving reason is given for first separating glycerol from fatty acids before soap-making, and what restriction on the cheaper alkalies is noted?

q03
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, when preparing Twitchell's reagent from the viscous upper layer, what washing sequence and drying temperature are specified before it is ready for use?

q04
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, if the salt used is pure, what sodium-chloride percentage and density are given for saturated brine used in soap-making?

q05
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, how do the quoted degrees for solid caustic soda differ from those for solid caustic potash in what percentage they represent?

q06
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, why should the temperature during palm-oil bleaching not rise above 130 deg. F. (54 deg. C.)?

q07
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, in the method using an indefinite amount of alkali with separation of waste lye, what three operations occur in order before the fitting used for milling soap base and household soaps?

q08
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, when a sample of marbled hydrated soap is mixed with the colouring solution, how do the signs of excessive alkali and deficient alkali differ?

q09
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, why is caustic soda lye preferred for graining out soaps made from cocoa-nut and palm-kernel oils?

q10
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, when a frame has been filled or crutching in it has finished, how is the soap surface shaped, and what is done the next day to assist consolidation?

q11
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, how does the effect of a strong soda-ash solution differ when added to a firm soap rather than to a weak soap?

q12
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, what perfume quantities per cwt. are described for cheaper grades of milled soaps and for more costly soaps, including the usual upper amount for the cheaper grades?

q13
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, why is a cutter with convex ends preferred to one that leaves concave ends when preparing toilet soap for stamping?

q14
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, how does freshly distilled bay oil differ from bay oil in general in its solubility in 90 per cent. alcohol?

q15
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, what proportions of citronellal are stated for citronella oil and eucalyptus citriodora oil?

q16
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, after hydrochloric-acid and aluminium-sulphate treatment of spent lyes has yielded a clear solution, what processing sequence makes the liquor ready for evaporation?

q17
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, in the separate soap determinations, which indicator is used to titrate free caustic alkali in the alcoholic filtrate, and which is used for free carbonated alkali in the aqueous extract of the filter residue?

q18
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, in Halphen's test for cotton-seed oil fatty acids, what are the two successive heating stages, and what colour denotes the presence of cotton-seed oil?

q19
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, according to the Board of Trade report quoted, how many soap and candle factories did Australia have in 1905, and how much soap did they produce?

q20
In The Handbook of Soap Manufacture by W. H. Simmons and H. A. Appleton, why was the amount of soap produced annually in Britain readily obtainable until 1853?
